npm/README.md, before:

# `@deno/kv`

![https://github.com/denoland/denokv/actions](https://github.com/denoland/denokv/workflows/npm/badge.svg)

A [Deno KV](https://deno.com/kv) client library optimized for Node.js.

- Access [Deno Deploy](https://deno.com/deploy) remote databases (or any
  endpoint implementing the open
  [KV Connect](https://github.com/denoland/denokv/blob/main/proto/kv-connect.md)
  protocol) on Node, Bun, the browser, or any JavaScript environment.
- Create local KV databases backed by
  [SQLite](https://www.sqlite.org/index.html), using optimized native
  [NAPI](https://nodejs.org/docs/latest-v18.x/api/n-api.html) packages for
  Node - compatible with DBs created by Deno itself.
- Create ephemeral in-memory KV instances backed by SQLite memory files or by a
  lightweight JS-only implementation for testing.
- Zero JS dependencies, architecture-specific native code for SQLite backend
  (see below)
- Simply call the exported `openKv` function (equiv to
  [`Deno.openKv`](https://deno.land/api?s=Deno.openKv&unstable)) with a url or
  local path to get started!

### Quick start - Node 18+

_Install the [NPM package](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@deno/kv)_ 👉
`npm install @deno/kv`

_Remote KV Database_

```ts
import { openKv } from "@deno/kv";

// to open a database connection to an existing Deno Deploy KV database,
// first obtain the database ID from your project dashboard:
// https://dash.deno.com/projects/YOUR_PROJECT/kv

// connect to the remote database
const kv = await openKv(
  "https://api.deno.com/databases/YOUR_DATABASE_ID/connect",
);
// access token for auth is the value of environment variable DENO_KV_ACCESS_TOKEN by default

// do anything using the KV api: https://deno.land/api?s=Deno.Kv&unstable
const result = await kv.set(["from-client"], "hello!");
console.log(result);

// close the database connection
kv.close();

// to provide an explicit access token, pass it as an additional option
const kv2 = await openKv(
  "https://api.deno.com/databases/YOUR_DATABASE_ID/connect",
  { accessToken: mySecretAccessToken },
);
```

_Local KV Database_

```ts
import { openKv } from "@deno/kv";

// create a local KV database instance backed by SQLite
const kv = await openKv("kv.db");

// do anything using the KV api: https://deno.land/api?s=Deno.Kv&unstable
const result = await kv.set(["from-client"], "hello!");
console.log(result);

// close the database connection
kv.close();
```

_In-Memory KV Database (no native code)_

```ts
import { openKv } from "@deno/kv";

// create an ephemeral KV instance for testing
const kv = await openKv("");

// do anything using the KV api: https://deno.land/api?s=Deno.Kv&unstable
const result = await kv.set(["from-client"], "hello!");
console.log(result);

// close the database connection
kv.close();
```

> Examples use ESM syntax, but this package supports CJS `require`-based usage
> as well

### Local KV Databases

Local disk-based databases are backed by
[SQLite](https://www.sqlite.org/index.html), and are compatible with DBs created
with Deno itself:

- leverages shared Rust code from
  [denoland/denokv](https://github.com/denoland/denokv) with a small shim
  compiled for Node's native interface via the [NAPI-RS](https://napi.rs/)
  framework
- an architecture-specific native package dependency is selected and installed
  at `npm install` time via the standard NPM
  [peer dependency mechanism](https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v10/configuring-npm/package-json#peerdependencies)

The following native architectures are supported:

|               | node18 | node20 |
| ------------- | ------ | ------ |
| Windows x64   | ✓      | ✓      |
| macOS x64     | ✓      | ✓      |
| macOS arm64   | ✓      | ✓      |
| Linux x64 gnu | ✓      | ✓      |

### Credits

- Protobuf code generated with [pb](https://deno.land/x/pbkit/cli/pb/README.md)
- NPM package generated with [dnt](https://github.com/denoland/dnt)
- Initial code contributed by
  [skymethod/kv-connect-kit](https://github.com/skymethod/kv-connect-kit)

---

### API

This package exports a single convenience function `openKv`, taking an optional
string `path`, with optional `opts`. Depending on the `path` provided, one of
three different implementations are used:

- if `path` is omitted or blank, an ephemeral `in-memory` db implementation is
  used, useful for testing
- if `path` is an http or https url, the `remote` client implementation is used
  to connect to [Deno Deploy](https://deno.com/deploy) or self-hosted
  [denokv](https://github.com/denoland/denokv) instances
- otherwise the `path` is passed to the native `sqlite` implementation - can
  specify local paths or `:memory:` for SQLite's
  [in-memory mode](https://www.sqlite.org/inmemorydb.html)

You can override the implementation used via the `implementation` option:

```ts
const kv = await openKv("https://example.com/not-really-remote", {
  implementation: "in-memory",
});
```

Pass the `debug` option to `console.log` additional debugging info:

```ts
const kv = await openKv("http://localhost:4512/", { debug: true });
```

### Backend-specific options

Each implementation supports different additional options:

_Remote backend_

```ts
export interface RemoteServiceOptions {
  /** Access token used to authenticate to the remote service */
  readonly accessToken: string;

  /** Wrap unsupported V8 payloads to instances of UnknownV8 instead of failing.
   *
   * Only applicable when using the default serializer. */
  readonly wrapUnknownValues?: boolean;

  /** Enable some console logging */
  readonly debug?: boolean;

  /** Custom serializer to use when serializing v8-encoded KV values.
   *
   * When you are running on Node 18+, pass the 'serialize' function in Node's 'v8' module. */
  readonly encodeV8?: EncodeV8;

  /** Custom deserializer to use when deserializing v8-encoded KV values.
   *
   * When you are running on Node 18+, pass the 'deserialize' function in Node's 'v8' module. */
  readonly decodeV8?: DecodeV8;

  /** Custom fetcher to use for the underlying http calls.
   *
   * Defaults to global 'fetch'`
   */
  readonly fetcher?: Fetcher;

  /** Max number of times to attempt to retry certain fetch errors (like 5xx) */
  readonly maxRetries?: number;

  /** Limit to specific KV Connect protocol versions */
  readonly supportedVersions?: KvConnectProtocolVersion[];
}
```

_Native SQLite backend_

```ts
export interface NapiBasedServiceOptions {
  /** Enable some console logging */
  readonly debug?: boolean;

  /** Underlying native napi interface */
  readonly napi?: NapiInterface;

  /** Custom serializer to use when serializing v8-encoded KV values.
   *
   * When you are running on Node 18+, pass the 'serialize' function in Node's 'v8' module. */
  readonly encodeV8: EncodeV8;

  /** Custom deserializer to use when deserializing v8-encoded KV values.
   *
   * When you are running on Node 18+, pass the 'deserialize' function in Node's 'v8' module. */
  readonly decodeV8: DecodeV8;

  /** The database will be opened as an in-memory database. */
  readonly inMemory?: boolean;
}
```

_Lightweight In-Memory backend_

```ts
export interface InMemoryServiceOptions {
  /** Enable some console logging */
  readonly debug?: boolean;

  /** Maximum number of attempts to deliver a failing queue message before giving up. Defaults to 10. */
  readonly maxQueueAttempts?: number;
}
```

Commit message:

Note in readme about remote client in the browser.

npm/README.md, after:

# `@deno/kv`

![https://github.com/denoland/denokv/actions](https://github.com/denoland/denokv/workflows/npm/badge.svg)

A [Deno KV](https://deno.com/kv) client library optimized for Node.js.

- Access [Deno Deploy](https://deno.com/deploy) remote databases (or any
  endpoint implementing the open
  [KV Connect](https://github.com/denoland/denokv/blob/main/proto/kv-connect.md)
  protocol) on Node, Bun, or any JavaScript environment. 
  - Most use cases will be server-side, but the remote client works directly in
    the browser if you provide a custom `fetcher` to a server proxy
    (Deno Deploy's endpoints don't currently allow CORS).
- Create local KV databases backed by
  [SQLite](https://www.sqlite.org/index.html), using optimized native
  [NAPI](https://nodejs.org/docs/latest-v18.x/api/n-api.html) packages for
  Node - compatible with DBs created by Deno itself.
- Create ephemeral in-memory KV instances backed by SQLite memory files or by a
  lightweight JS-only implementation for testing.
- Zero JS dependencies, architecture-specific native code for SQLite backend
  (see below).
- Simply call the exported `openKv` function (equiv to
  [`Deno.openKv`](https://deno.land/api?s=Deno.openKv&unstable)) with a url or
  local path to get started!

### Quick start - Node 18+

_Install the [NPM package](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@deno/kv)_ 👉
`npm install @deno/kv`

_Remote KV Database_

```ts
import { openKv } from "@deno/kv";

// to open a database connection to an existing Deno Deploy KV database,
// first obtain the database ID from your project dashboard:
// https://dash.deno.com/projects/YOUR_PROJECT/kv

// connect to the remote database
const kv = await openKv(
  "https://api.deno.com/databases/YOUR_DATABASE_ID/connect",
);
// access token for auth is the value of environment variable DENO_KV_ACCESS_TOKEN by default

// do anything using the KV api: https://deno.land/api?s=Deno.Kv&unstable
const result = await kv.set(["from-client"], "hello!");
console.log(result);

// close the database connection
kv.close();

// to provide an explicit access token, pass it as an additional option
const kv2 = await openKv(
  "https://api.deno.com/databases/YOUR_DATABASE_ID/connect",
  { accessToken: mySecretAccessToken },
);
```

_Local KV Database_

```ts
import { openKv } from "@deno/kv";

// create a local KV database instance backed by SQLite
const kv = await openKv("kv.db");

// do anything using the KV api: https://deno.land/api?s=Deno.Kv&unstable
const result = await kv.set(["from-client"], "hello!");
console.log(result);

// close the database connection
kv.close();
```

_In-Memory KV Database (no native code)_

```ts
import { openKv } from "@deno/kv";

// create an ephemeral KV instance for testing
const kv = await openKv("");

// do anything using the KV api: https://deno.land/api?s=Deno.Kv&unstable
const result = await kv.set(["from-client"], "hello!");
console.log(result);

// close the database connection
kv.close();
```

> Examples use ESM syntax, but this package supports CJS `require`-based usage
> as well

### Local KV Databases

Local disk-based databases are backed by
[SQLite](https://www.sqlite.org/index.html), and are compatible with DBs created
with Deno itself:

- leverages shared Rust code from
  [denoland/denokv](https://github.com/denoland/denokv) with a small shim
  compiled for Node's native interface via the [NAPI-RS](https://napi.rs/)
  framework
- an architecture-specific native package dependency is selected and installed
  at `npm install` time via the standard NPM
  [peer dependency mechanism](https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v10/configuring-npm/package-json#peerdependencies)

The following native architectures are supported:

|               | node18 | node20 |
| ------------- | ------ | ------ |
| Windows x64   | ✓      | ✓      |
| macOS x64     | ✓      | ✓      |
| macOS arm64   | ✓      | ✓      |
| Linux x64 gnu | ✓      | ✓      |

### Credits

- Protobuf code generated with [pb](https://deno.land/x/pbkit/cli/pb/README.md)
- NPM package generated with [dnt](https://github.com/denoland/dnt)
- Initial code contributed by
  [skymethod/kv-connect-kit](https://github.com/skymethod/kv-connect-kit)

---

### API

This package exports a single convenience function `openKv`, taking an optional
string `path`, with optional `opts`. Depending on the `path` provided, one of
three different implementations are used:

- if `path` is omitted or blank, an ephemeral `in-memory` db implementation is
  used, useful for testing
- if `path` is an http or https url, the `remote` client implementation is used
  to connect to [Deno Deploy](https://deno.com/deploy) or self-hosted
  [denokv](https://github.com/denoland/denokv) instances
- otherwise the `path` is passed to the native `sqlite` implementation - can
  specify local paths or `:memory:` for SQLite's
  [in-memory mode](https://www.sqlite.org/inmemorydb.html)

You can override the implementation used via the `implementation` option:

```ts
const kv = await openKv("https://example.com/not-really-remote", {
  implementation: "in-memory",
});
```

Pass the `debug` option to `console.log` additional debugging info:

```ts
const kv = await openKv("http://localhost:4512/", { debug: true });
```

### Backend-specific options

Each implementation supports different additional options,
via the second parameter to `openKv`:

_Remote backend_

```ts
export interface RemoteServiceOptions {
  /** Access token used to authenticate to the remote service */
  readonly accessToken: string;

  /** Wrap unsupported V8 payloads to instances of UnknownV8 instead of failing.
   *
   * Only applicable when using the default serializer. */
  readonly wrapUnknownValues?: boolean;

  /** Enable some console logging */
  readonly debug?: boolean;

  /** Custom serializer to use when serializing v8-encoded KV values.
   *
   * When you are running on Node 18+, pass the 'serialize' function in Node's 'v8' module. */
  readonly encodeV8?: EncodeV8;

  /** Custom deserializer to use when deserializing v8-encoded KV values.
   *
   * When you are running on Node 18+, pass the 'deserialize' function in Node's 'v8' module. */
  readonly decodeV8?: DecodeV8;

  /** Custom fetcher to use for the underlying http calls.
   *
   * Defaults to global 'fetch'`
   */
  readonly fetcher?: Fetcher;

  /** Max number of times to attempt to retry certain fetch errors (like 5xx) */
  readonly maxRetries?: number;

  /** Limit to specific KV Connect protocol versions */
  readonly supportedVersions?: KvConnectProtocolVersion[];
}
```

_Native SQLite backend_

```ts
export interface NapiBasedServiceOptions {
  /** Enable some console logging */
  readonly debug?: boolean;

  /** Underlying native napi interface */
  readonly napi?: NapiInterface;

  /** Custom serializer to use when serializing v8-encoded KV values.
   *
   * When you are running on Node 18+, pass the 'serialize' function in Node's 'v8' module. */
  readonly encodeV8: EncodeV8;

  /** Custom deserializer to use when deserializing v8-encoded KV values.
   *
   * When you are running on Node 18+, pass the 'deserialize' function in Node's 'v8' module. */
  readonly decodeV8: DecodeV8;

  /** The database will be opened as an in-memory database. */
  readonly inMemory?: boolean;
}
```

_Lightweight In-Memory backend_

```ts
export interface InMemoryServiceOptions {
  /** Enable some console logging */
  readonly debug?: boolean;

  /** Maximum number of attempts to deliver a failing queue message before giving up. Defaults to 10. */
  readonly maxQueueAttempts?: number;
}
```
